.Dd 2019-07-11
.TH RRR.CONF 5
.SH NAME
Read Route Record is a dynamic module-based message handling program
for collecting, buffering, processing and storing messages and measurements.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B rrr
environment is set up with a configuration file. The file specifies any number
of
.B instances
of different
.B modules.
The different instances either get messages from other
modules or read them externally. Some also save messages externally or
send them over the network.
.PP
Instances are linked to each other using the 
.B senders=sender1,sender2,...
argument, which tells the instance which other modules to get messages from. A
.B source
module is a module which cannot read from other modules, and this argument should
not be specified.
.PP
.B rrr
may be extended with custom modules. Custom functionality may also be achieved by
using a module which can send data to and from a python program.
.PP
.B rrr
automatically restarts all running instances in case one instance for any
reason stops or hangs, like due to network problems. A failing instance
usually does not make
.B rrr
quit, all instances are simply restarted.
.PP
.SH SYNTAX
Any number of instances may be specified. An instance specification begins with a [] containing
the user chosen name of the instance. A module to use must then be specified, along with
module-specific settings. The
.B senders=
setting is mandatory for modules which read from other modules, but invalid for modules
which are sources (see MODULES section). An instance section ends when a new begins
or when we reach the end of the file.
.PP
.nf
# Comment begins with #, the rest of the line is ignored
[INSTANCE NAME]             # User chosen name of the instance
module={MODULE NAME}        # Which module to use for the instance
senders=INSTANCE NAME,...   # Which other instances to read from (not for source modules)
argument1=value1            # Module-specific arguments
argument2=value2
...
.BR
[INSTANCE NAME]
module={MODULE NAME}
...
.fi	
.PP
If an instance is specified as sender in more than one other instance, these will compete
about messages from it. Instances may not use themselves as senders.
.SH MESSAGES
A message consists of at least a timestamp (in milliseconds) which is used to identify the message. 
It may also contain one of the following types of data:
.SS TAG MESSAGES
Some modules may generate a tag message after they have processed a message, for instance
when it has been successfully saved somewhere. The tag messages can be sent back
to prior modules in the chain which might cache messages untill they have been safely stored.
The tag message contains the whole original message with the tag flag set.
.SS VOLTAGE MESSAGES
The voltage message are an implementation used to get voltage readings (or other readings) with
max, min and average values and save them to a database. In the future, this
should be generalized.
.SS DATA ARRAY MESSAGES
Some modules support parsing data arrays from externally or from other modules. They might require a
list of expected data types to be specified in their configuration. If the total size og the input
does not match the received input, the parsing of the message will fail.
.PP
The general syntax is a comma separated list of data type and size pairs:
.PP
.Dl {DATA TYPE A},{DATA SIZE A},{DATA TYPE B},{DATA SIZE B},...
.PP
When reading many data entries of the same type, and array specification may preceed the type/data-pair.
The following will duplicate TYPE A four times:
.PP
.Dl array,4,{DATA TYPE A},{DATA SIZE A}
.PP
.B DATA TYPE
may be one of the following:
.PP
.Bl -tag -width -indent
.It be
A big endian number, converted to host endianess automatically. Size range 1 to 8.
.It le
A little endian number, converted to host endianess automatically. Size range 1 to 8.
.It h
A number expected to already be in host endianess, no conversion is performed. Size range 1 to 8.
.It blob
Some amount of binary data or text, not processed at all. Size must be > 0.
.El
.PP
For instance, this specifies four big-endian integers of 2 bytes and one blob of 10 bytes, a total size of 18 bytes.
.PP
.Dl array,4,be,2,blob,10
.SS IP MESSAGES
Some modules support parsing of IP messages. These are simply normal messages apart from that they also contain information
about the originating IP addresses. They are used for instance when sending replies back to a sender over network to know
where to send them. Some modules require that readers are IP capable when reading from them and vice versa.
.SS ACK MESSAGES
An ACK message is sent over network to inform senders that a packet was successfully retrieved.
.SH MODULES
.PP
Modules have different special capabilites, denoted by the following letters. The actual implementation may
vary between modules. Many modules can despite this handle all types of messages, more or less ignoring their contents.
.PP
.Bl -tag -width -indent
.It S
Source module, cannot have senders
.It P
Processor modules, can have senders specified to read from (set with
.B senders=
)
.It A
Module supports data arrays (see above)
.It I
Module supports IP messages
.It T
Module supports tag (confirmation) messages
.It V
Module supports voltage reading messages
.El
.PP
The following modules and module-specific arguments are available and can be used
.PP
.SS dummy (S)
Constantly generates empty messages only with a timestamp set.
.PP
.Bl -tag -width -indent
.It dummy_no_generation={yes|no}
No messages are generated, defaults to yes. 
.It dummy_no_sleeping={yes|no}
Don't sleep between creating messages, but create as many messages as the reader can handle. Defaults to no.
.El
.SS udpreader (SA)
Listen to an UDP port and read messages of number arrays. The udpreader creates a message for each received packet
and adds a timestamp. If the received data does not match the specified data array, the packet is dropped.
.PP
.Bl -tag -width -indent
.It udpr_port=LISTEN PORT
Port to listen on, range is 1-65535
.It udpr_input_types=DATA ARRAY
Specification of expected data to receive in a network packet. See DATA ARRAYS for syntax.
.El
.PP
.SS voltmonitor (SV)
Read voltage readings from a USB device.
.PP
.Bl -tag -width -indent
.It vm_calibration=FLOAT
Factor to calibrate the readings, defaults to 1.124.
.It vm_channel={1|2}
Which channel to use on two-channel devices.
.El
.PP
.SS averager (PV)
The averager reads point measurements from it's senders and produces average measurments over a given timespan and
at a given rate. Information messages are passed through, these might for instance contain status messages from
measurement devices.
.PP
.Bl -tag -width -indent
.It avg_timespan=SECONDS
How long timespan to average over. Defaults to 15 seconds.
.It avg_interval=SECONDS
How often to produce average calculations. Defaults to 10 seconds.
.It avg_preserve_points={yes|no}
Preserve individual measurements and put them in output buffer. Defaults to no.
.It avg_discard_unknowns={yes|no}
Delete messages which are not point measurements and information messages. Defaults to no, which means to simply forward them.
.El
.SS blockdev (PT)
The blockdev module can puts messages it receives into a special round robin database and stores them untill overwritten.
This can be used to store messages temoporarily before sending over network and preserving them also in case of the program
stopping. On restart of
.B rrr
, all messages are read in from the database and can be read by other instances. If we receive a tag message for a message,
the stored message is tagged and is no longer re-read in case of restart.
.PP
The database file is of fixed size and must first be initialized using 
.B bdl(1).
.PP
.Bl -tag -width -indent
.It device_path=FILE
Path to an initialized block device file.
.It blockdev_always_tag={yes|no}
Always tag messages immediately as they are saved (as if we received a tag message for them), causing them not to be read in on restart.
.El
.SS controller (P)
This module can route messages between a source and blockdev and ipclient to safely cache messages locally before sending them 
over the network. An ipclient and a blockdev instance is set with a controller as sender, and the controller is set with
those two same instances as senders in addition to a third source instance. More than one source may be used, but using more
than one blockdev or ipclient might produce unwanted results.
.PP
The controller has two separate outbut buffers, one for ipclient and one for blockdev. If any other module tries to use
controller as a sender, it will produce an error. 
.PP
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
Messages from blockdev is sent to ipclient
.It
Messages from ipclient is sent to blockdev
.It
Messages from the source is sent to both ipclient and blockdev
.El
.PP
The controller can use the following modules as sources:
.PP
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
udpreader
.It
averager
.It
voltmonitor
.It
dummy
.El
.PP
Here is an example where we make measurements with voltmonitor and averager, and then send them over
the network with ipclient while caching them locally using blockdev.
.PP
.nf
                               Local host                             |           Remote host
----------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------
                                                                      |
                                   +------------+     +----------+    | (see ipserver/mysql paragraphs)
                                   |            | <=> | blockdev |    |
+-------------+    +----------+    |            |     +----------+    |
| voltmonitor | => | averager | => | controller |                     |
+-------------+    +----------+    |            |     +----------+    |    +----------+     +-------+
                                   |            | <=> | ipclient | <=====> | ipserver | <=> | mysql |
                                   +------------+     +----------+    |    +----------+     +-------+
----------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------
.PP
And the configuration file (for local host only):
.PP
[usb_voltmeter]
module=voltmonitor
vm_channel=1

[averager]
module=averager
senders=usb_voltmeter

[controller]
module=controller
senders=averager,blockdev,ipclient

[blockdev]
module=blockdev
blockdev_file=/tmp/rrr.bdl
senders=controller

[ipclient]
ipclient_server=10.0.0.2
senders=controller

.fi
.SS buffer (P)
The buffer collects all messages from all senders and wait for them to be collected by another instance.
.SS duplicator (P)
The duplicator works like buffer only that it creates one output buffer for every reader and duplicates the
data it reads from other modules for each reader. The readers of duplicator are detected automatically.
.SS ipclient (PT)
The ipclient module collects any message from senders and sends them over the network to another 
.B rrr
environment with the an instance of the ipserver module using UDP. The ipclient caches messages locally in RAM
untill an ACK message is received from the ipserver. It will try to resend unacknowlegded messages on a regular
basis as they might have been lost. Messages are checksummed with a CRC32 algorithm.
.PP
A keyfile of an arbitary length may be specified from which an AES256 key is generated. It should contain good
random data. ipclient will then encrypt messages prior to sending (and use the same key to decrypt received messages).
.PP
The ipclient module, while creating IP messages, does not support reading IP messages from other modules. Messages
are always sent to the same ipserver target. To send packets to arbitary receivers, ipserver must be used.
.Bl -tag -width -indent
.It ipclient_server=SERVER NAME OR ADDRESS
The name or address of the server which we communucate with, defaults to localhost.
.It ipclient_server_port=PORT NUMBER
The port number the server listens to, defaults to 5555.
.It ipclient_src_port=PORT NUMBER
Source port used for sending and receiving packtes, defaults to 5555.
.It ipclient_keyfile=KEY FILE
An optional keyfile which we use to generate a key used to encrypt messages we send. The server must use the same file.
.It ipclient_no_ack={yes|no}
Do not store messages locally in RAM awaiting ACK messages, defaults to no. Any received ACK messages are ignored.
.El
.SS ipserver (PTI)
This module will listen on the specified UDP port waiting for messages from ipclient. When a message is received,
and ACK message is generated and sent back.
.PP
It is also possible to send other messages back, for instance tag messages from a module which saves messages permanently.
Modules which produce tag messages should then be specified as senders for ipserver.
.PP
Sender modules specified for ipserver must be IP capable and specify the correct target for each message. There are no checks
regarding the target of the message apart from that the target must be a valid IP-address.
.PP
The ipserver module does cache messages temporarily and check wether they arrive or not. If a sender misses out on an ACK message
from ipserver, it must simply re-send the original message in which ipserver will generate a new ACK upon receival.
.PP
It is possible for two ipserver instances to communicate over network (as opposed to one ipclient and one ipserver). They will
generate ACK messages and send back to each other, but these will simply be forwarded for other modules to pick up. Sender modules
of ipserver must then specifiy the correct target addresses in the IP message.
.Bl -tag -width -indent
.It ipserver_keyfile=KEY FILE
An optional keyfile which we use to generate a key used to encrypt messages we send. The clients must use the same file.
.It ipserver_server_port=PORT NUMBER
The port used for sending and receiving packtes, defaults to 5555.
.El
.PP
.SS mysql (PTAIV)
This module will read in messages from other modules, possibly IP-capable, and save them to a myqsl or MariaDB 
database. Tag messages are
generated for each saved message. Tag messages for messages originating locally (from non-IP modules) can only be picked
up by non-IP modules and vice versa.
.PP
A column plan must be used to describe the table we are saving to. The received data must match this column plan. If
data save for any reason fails, like if the database is down or the table is misconfigured, we cache the failed messages
and try again later. It is not possible for the mysql module to know wether it's settings are at fault or if the database
is at fault. Messages which fails can however be set to be dropped instead.
.Bl -tag -width -indent
.It mysql_server=SERVER NAME
The server name of the MySQL or MariaDB server to use
.It mysql_port=PORT NUMBER
The port number used to connect to the server.
.It mysql_user=USER NAME
The username for logging into the server
.It mysql_password=PASSWORD
The password for logging into the server
.It mysql_db=DATABASE NAME
The name of the database to use
.It mysql_table=TABLE NAME
The table name to use for storing data
.It mysql_drop_unknown_messages={yes|no}
If a message fails to be saved into the specified table for any reason, simply delete it instead of trying again later. Defaults to no.
.It mysql_no_tagging={yes|no}
Do not generate tag messages for other modules to pick up. Defaults to no.
.It mysql_colplan={array|voltage}
Specifiy wether a table with arbitary columns should be used, or a fixed voltage-style table.
.El
.PP
If the
.B voltage
column plan is used, we expect to receive voltage messages and the target table must contain at least these columns:
.PP
.nf
CREATE TABLE `entries` (
	`timestamp` bigint(20) UNSIGNED NOT NULL,
	`source` varchar(50) NOT NULL,
	`class` tinyint(3) UNSIGNED NOT NULL,
	`time_from` bigint(20) UNSIGNED NOT NULL,
	`time_to` bigint(20) UNSIGNED NOT NULL,
	`value` bigint(20) NOT NULL,
	`message` varchar(255) NOT NULL,
	`message_length` int(10) UNSIGNED NOT NULL
) ENGINE=InnoDB DEFAULT CHARSET=latin1;
.fi
.PP
If the
.B array
column plan is used, the following options can be used to describe the target table:
.PP
.Bl -tag -width -indent
.It mysql_columns={column name 1,column name 2,...}
Specify the columns in the table to write data to. The column count must match the number of values received in array
messages from other modules. The data types only matters to some extent, the columns should be able to hold the data
types received. Integers are sent to the database as integers and blobs are sent as blobs.
If a message contains an array of values, one column sould be specified for the whole array. Arrays are sent to mysql
as blobs.
.It mysql_blob_write_columns={column name 1,column name 2,...}
Used to force to send data as blob (raw data) to the database for the specified columns regardless of their type.
.It mysql_special_columns={column name 1,column name 2,...}
.It mysql_special_values={columns value 1,column value 2,...}
Used to write fixed values to the database.
.It mysql_add_timestamp_col={yes|no}
In addition to the other columns, write to a column named `timestamp` and save the timestamp from the message here.
.El
.SS python3 (P)
This module can send messages to a custom python program and read them back.
All messages read from the senders are sent to the python program to the process function specified.
A read-only source function may also be specified if the python program should only generate messages by itself and not receive any.
It is possible to specify both source- and process-functions at the same time.
Functions should return 0 on success and put any messages into the result class provided in the argument.
If something goes wrong, the functions can return 1 or raise an exception which makes RRR stop all running instances and restart.
.PP
The RRR module should be imported by the custom python program.
It can also be reviewed to understand the classes used, rrr_settings, vl_message and rrr_result.
It is usually found in "/usr/lib/python(VERSION OF PYTHON)/site-packages/rrr.py", and in the source directory "./src/python/rrr.py".
.PP
The following options may be specified:
.Bl -tag -width -indent
.It python3_module=MODULE NAME
The module name for the python3 program to be executed. Imported by 'from MODULE NAME import *'
.It python3_module_path=MODULE NAME
An extra path in which to search for the module.
.It python3_source_function=FUNCTION NAME
The name of the source function in the python program which we read from continously.
.It python3_process_function=FUNCTION NAME
The name of the processing function in the python program which we send packets from other modules to. We also read any messages sent back.
.It python3_config_function=FUNCTION NAME
The name of the function in the python program to which we send the settings structure.
All settings defined inside the python block in the configuration file are sent in here.
The function might also send the settings back after which settings which have been accessed are updated.
.It CUSTOM SETTING=VALUE
Any number of custom settings for the python program might be set as needed.
.El
.PP
Below follows an example python message processing and generating program.
.PP
.nf
from rrr import *
import time

def process(result : rrr_result, message: vl_message):
	# modify the retrieved message as needed
	message.timestamp_from = message.timestamp_from + 1
	# queue the message to be sent back (optional) for python to give to readers
	result.put(message)
	return 0

def source(result : rrr_result):
	# create a new message
	message = vl_message(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, bytearray("abcdefg", encoding='utf8'))
	# queue the message to be sent back (optional) for python to give to readers
	result.put(message)
	# sleep to limit output rate
	time.sleep(1)
	return 0

def config(result : rrr_result, settings : rrr_instance_settings):
	# retrieve some custom settings from configuration file
	print ("1: " + settings['custom_config_argument_1'])
	print ("2: " + settings['custom_config_argument_2'])
	# send settings back to update which have been read (optional)
	result.put(settings)
	return 0
.fi

.SS raw (P)
This module simply drains data from it's senders and deletes it after printing a message if debugging is active. It
can read from both IP modules and non-IP.
.El
.SH SEE ALSO
.Xr rrr(1),
.Xr bdl(1)
