.Dd 2023-04-15
.TH RRR 1
.SH NAME
Read Route Record is a dynamic module-based message handling program
for collecting, buffering, processing and storing messages and measurements.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rrr {CONFIGURATION FILES OR DIRECTORIES}
.Dl [-W|--no-watchdog-timers]
.Dl [-T|--no-thread-restart]
.Dl [-t|--start-interval]
.Dl [-s|--stats]
.Dl [-m|--message-hooks]
.Dl [-r|--run-directory[=]RUN DIRECTORY]
.Dl [-l|--loglevel-translation]
.Dl [-o|--output-buffer-warn-limit[=]LIMIT]
.Dl [-b|--banner]
.Dl [-e|--environment-file[=]ENVIRONMENT FILE]
.Dl [-d|--debuglevel[=]FLAGS]
.Dl [-D|--debuglevel-on-exit[=]FLAGS]
.Dl [-h|--help]
.Dl [-v|--version]

.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B rrr
environment is set up with a configuration file. The file specifies any number
of
.B instances
of different
.B modules.
The different instances either get messages from each othr or read them externally.
Some also save messages externally or send them over the network. One instance will
run in its own thread, and threads are restarted if they for some reson exit or become hung. 
.PP
A variety of network protocols are available to communicate with other software, as well
as database modules to save data.
.PP
.B rrr
may be extended with custom modules. Custom functionality may also be achieved by
using a module which can send data to and from a python or perl program.
.PP
.B rrr
will run untill terminated, and
automatically restarts all running instances in case one instance for any
reason stops or hangs, like due to network problems. A failing instance
usually does not make
.B rrr
quit, all instances are simply restarted.
.PP
If
.B rrr
is started with multiple configuration files, one fork is created for each of the files. Note that
all forks will be stopped and the program will exit if a single one of them fails.
.PP
When multiple configuration files are loaded by the same program, the name of the configuration file
of a fork is included in the logging output when it prints something.
.PP
.SH OPTIONS
One or more configuration files or directories must always be specified. If a directory is specified,
all files inside it with names ending in .conf will be loaded. Subdirectories are not checked.
.PP
.IP -d|--debuglevel[=]FLAGS
.IP -D|--debuglevel_on_exit[=]FLAGS
A debuglevel may be specified at command line making
.B rrr
print different debug information.
By default, only errors are printed.
The
.B -D
option makes
.B rrr
set a new debuglevel when the main loop exits. If none is set,
.B -d
is used.
The debuglevel is calculated by adding any of the following numbers together:
.Bl -tag -width -indent
.It 0
Severe errors (always printed)
.It 1
Info about loading and closing of modules, threads and forks.
.It 2
Messages between modules, including backstop indication, and requests sent/received by modules.
.It 4
Detailed information about message processing withing modules
.It 8
Messages between forks (mmap channels) and buffer searching, ratelimiting and cleanup
.It 16
Cmodule processing (for modules cmodule, perl5 and python3)
.It 32
Hex dumps during endian conversion and validation of messages
.It 64
Socket open, close, read, write
.It 128
Thread handling
.It 256
Event queue processing (printed to standard output, not delivered through journal module or systemd logging)
.El
.IP -W|--no-watchdog-timers
Do not monitor threads for becoming unresponsive. If not set and a thread is found to be hung, all threads are terminated and
.B rrr
will then restart all of them. One instance of a module corresponds to one thread.
.IP -T|--no-thread-restart
When a thread for some reason exits, close the other threads and exit as opposed to restarting all the threads which is the default behaviour.
.IP -t|--start-interval
When starting multiple configuration files, this interval may be used to delay the starting of each configuration.
This is useful when RRR with multiple configuration files on slow hardware.
The timer may be set to a number between 0 and 10000, units are milliseconds.
.IP -s|--stats
Enable the statistics engine which
.Xr rrr_stats(1)
can connect to.
.IP -m|--message-hooks
Enable message hooks in the statistics engine.
This makes it possible to view messages as they pass between modules using
.Xr rrr_stats(1)
.
Hooking messages may give a performance penalty.
This option has no effect if
.IP -s|--stats
is not used.
.IP -b|--banner
Print RRR banner before starting.
.IP -r|--run-directory[=]RUN DIRECTORY
Specify an alternative default prefix for runtime sockets.
.IP -l|--loglevel-translation
Translate output loglevels to RFC5424 format. Internal loglevels will be translated so that error messages become ERROR
and other messages DEBUG (loglevels 3 and 7).
.IP -o|--output-buffer-warn-limit[=]LIMIT
Maximum number of messages in an instance's output buffer before warnings are
printed. Warnings will be printed every second if the limit is exceeded. This
can help to detecting issues with slow-reading instances. If set to 0, warnings
are disabled. If not given, the default value of 1000 is used.
.IP -e|--environment-file
Specify an environment file to read in before the program starts.
The file should contain one variable per line, like VARIABLE=VALUE. 
The =VALUE part may be omitted, in which case the variable will be set to 1.
Any variables may be specified, and they will override any variables already set in the environment.
No error is produced if the specified file does not exist, but an error is produced if it does exist but cannot be opened.

Comments are specified by beginning a line with #.

Some variables corresponding to command line arguments may be set in the environment or environment file.
If a variable is specified both in the environment and at the command line, the command line argument will take precedence.

.Bl -tag -width -indent
.It RRR_DEBUGLEVEL
.It RRR_DEBUGLEVEL_ON_EXIT
.It RRR_NO_WATCHDOG_TIMERS
.It RRR_NO_THREAD_RESTART
.It RRR_START_INTERVAL
.It RRR_LOGLEVEL_TRANSLATION
.It RRR_INSTANCE_OUTPUT_BUFFER_WARN_LIMIT
.It RRR_RUN_DIRECTORY
.El

For on/off variables, "no" or "0" will be interpreted as
.B off,
anything else wil be interpreted as
.B on.

While the environment file may be specified for all
.B rrr
binaries, only the variables which have corresponding command line arguments in each binary are used.
Other variables are ignored, which means that the same environment file may be used for all binaries.
.SH SIGNALS
.IP SIGINT|Ctrl+C
Encourage threads and forks to stop in a polite matter before exiting the program. A second SIGINT causes immediate exit.
.IP SIGUSR1
Encourage threads and forks to stop in a polite matter before exiting the program. Multiple calls are treated the same way.
.IP SIGTERM
Exit immediately.
.SH RETURN VALUE
.B rrr
returns 0 on success and 1 on failure.
.SH SEE ALSO
.Xr rrr_post(1),
.Xr rrr_stats(1),
.Xr rrr_msg(1),
.Xr rrr.conf(5),
.Xr rrr_python3(5)
