.Dd 2019-10-04
.TH RRR 1
.SH NAME
Read Route Record is a dynamic module-based message handling program
for collecting, buffering, processing and storing messages and measurements.
.PP
.B rrr_helper
is a
.Xr python(1)
module which is available in python scripts run by RRR, see
.Xr rrr.conf(5)
and
.Xr rrr(1)
for information on how to run such a script. The module cannot be used outside
of RRR as this would make no sense.
.SH SYNOPSIS
These classes are available in python script when run by RRR.
.Dl from rrr_helper import rrr_socket
.Dl from rrr_helper import rrr_vl_message
.Dl from rrr_helper import rrr_array
.Dl from rrr_helper import rrr_array_value
.Dl from rrr_helper import rrr_setting
.PP
These 
.B handler functions
should be specified in a python script which is to be used by RRR.
.Dl def [NAME OF SOURCE FUNCTION](socket : rrr_socket):
.Dl def [NAME OF PROCESS FUNCTION](socket : rrr_socket, message : vl_message):
.Dl def [NAME OF CONFIG FUNCTION](socket : rrr_socket, setting : rrr_setting)
.SH OBJECTS AND FUNCTIONS
Below follows detailed description of methods and members of the RRR objects.
.SS rrr_vl_message
Structure which contain a single RRR messsage which it is possible to mangle. A message may or may not contain a data
array.
.TP
.B rrr_vl_message.set(type,class,timestamp_from,timestamp_to,data_numeric)
Set metadata of the message. The timestamps are times in epoch microseconds. The
.B data_numeric
parameter is an unsigned value
of the actual measurement. To validation is performed on the values other than them being positive integers.
.PP
Possible values for
.B type
are:
.Bl -ohang
.It Sy rrr_vl message.TYPE_MSG
.It Sy rrr_vl_message.TYPE_ACK
.It Sy rrr_vl_message.TYPE_TAG
.El
.PP
Possible values for
.B class
are:
.PP

.TP
.B rrr_vl_message.CLASS_POINT
Point measurement, timestamp_from and timestamp_to are normally equal
.TP
.B rrr_vl_message.CLASS_AVG
Average measurement, starts at timestamp_from and ends at timestamp_to
.TP
.B rrr_vl_message.CLASS_MAX
Maximum measurement betweeen timestamp_from and timestamp_to
.TP
.B rrr_vl_message.CLASS_MIN
Minimum measurement betweeen timestamp_from and timestamp_to
.TP
.B rrr_vl_message.CLASS_INFO
Informational message, text might be put in the message body.
.TP
.B rrr_vl_message.CLASS_ARRAY
Message body contains a data array.
.El
.PP
The type
.B CLASS_ARRAY
is automatically set if the message contains an array, and any other data set in the message apart from in the header
is deleted.
.TP
.B rrr_vl_message.set_data(data : bytearray|str)
Set the body of a message. If the message contains an array,
.B discard_array()
must be called first. Returns TRUE on success and FALSE on error.
.TP
.B rrr_vl_message.get_data()
Return the raw body of a message as a bytearray. Might contain binary data.
.TP
.B rrr_vl_message.has_array()
Check if the message has an array or not. Returns TRUE if the message has an array, otherwise false.
.TP
.B rrr_vl_message.get_array()
Return the array of a message, or create one if not already existing. The returned object of type
.B rrr_array
may be modified, and the message is updated accordingly. Returns NULL if the message does not have an array.
.TP
.B rrr_vl_message.set_array(array : rrr_array)
Discard an array from a message (if it has one) and set a new array in the message.
.TP
.B rrr_vl_message.discard_array()
Discard an array from a message (if it has one).
.TP
.B rrr_vl_message.set_topic(topic : str)
Set the MQTT topic of a message.
.TP
.B rrr_vl_message.get_topic()
Return the MQTT topic of a message. If there is no topic, return an empty string.
.SS rrr_array
This class allows for modification of the array part of a message, or creation of a new one. An array consist
of multiple members, optionally with a tag to identify them. Each member may itself have multiple values, but these
values must then be of the same size.
.PP
The
.B rrr_array
object may be iterated.
.TP
.B rrr_array.count()
Count the members in the array.
.TP
.B rrr_array.get(tag : str|int)
Get a member by textual tag or numeric index. Returns an
.B rrr_array_value
object or NONE if the element is not found.
.TP
.B rrr_array.append(value : rrr_array_value)
Append an rrr_array_value to the array.
.TP
.B rrr_array.remove(tag : str|int)
Remove a value from the array.
.SS rrr_array_value
All items of an array is of this type, which itself contains one ore more items of a particular type.
.PP
Arrays received from RRR always has a particular type set, and the RRR python3 module will attempt to
convert any items to this type. If the type is set to be automatically identified, an RRR type is
chosen based on the first item in the array.
.PP
Some multibyte types require all items to be of equal length. If different lengths are needed, they
must be put into different values.
.PP
The
.B rrr_array_value
object may be iterated.
.PP
.TP
.B rrr_array_value.append(item)
Append an item to the array value.
.TP
.B rrr_array_value.count()
Count the number of elements in the array value.
.TP
.B rrr_array_value.get(index : int)
Get an item from the array value or return NONE if not found. 
.TP
.B rrr_array_value.set(index : int, item)
Set an item at a particular position to a new value. May return FALSE on error.
.TP
.B rrr_array_value.get_tag()
Get the current tag of the array value, might return an empty string.
.TP
.B rrr_array_value.set_tag(tag : str)
Set the tag of the array value. Set to empty string if no tag is to be used.
.TP
.B rrr_array_value.set_type(type : int)
Force a particular RRR type to be used for the value.
.TP
.B rrr_array_value.get_type()
Get the current type of the value.
.TP
.B rrr_array_value.get_type_str()
Get a string representation of the current type.
.PP
Possible values for
.B type
are:
.TP
.B rrr_array_value.TYPE_AUTO
Let RRR choose a type for the value based on the type of the values used in Python.
.TP
.B rrr_array_value.TYPE_H
A signed or unsigned integer with host endianess. Unsigned values may be go up to 2^64,
and signed values may be up to approximately positive or negative 2^63.
.TP
.B rrr_array_value.TYPE_BLOB
Binary data, accessed as bytearrays.
.TP
.B rrr_array_value.TYPE_SEP
One or more of the following characters: ! " # $ % & ' ( ) * + , - . / : ; < = > ? @ [  ] ^ _ ` { | } ~ LF CR TAB and SPACE
.TP
.B rrr_array_value.TYPE_MSG
A binary RRR message.
.TP
.B rrr_array_value.TYPE_FIXP
A signed 64 bit fixed point value with 24 bit decimal places. This means that the value '1' is stored as
.B 1 * 2^24
or
.B 1 << 23
.TP
.B rrr_array_value.TYPE_STR
A string of text.
.PP
Any multiple items of the types
.B BLOB, SEP
and
.B STR
must always be of identical length/size. The RRR python3-module will exit and restart if they are not.
.
.SS rrr_socket
To communicate with RRR in its python module, a UNIX socket is used "behind the scenes" over which messages
are sent in both directions.
.PP
When a
.B handler function
is called by RRR, it receives an
.B rrr_socket
object which is already connect to RRR, and it's possible to send messages immediately. It is also possible to set
up sockets manually to send data somewhere (
.Xr rrr_post(1)
would be able to read such messages). It is not possible to read messages from the socket.
.TP
.B rrr_socket()
The initializer takes no arguments.
.TP
.B rrr_socket.start([filename])
Create a new socket. If a filename is provided, connect to an existing socket. If not, create a new socket and listen for
incoming connections. The filename of the socket is generated automatically.
.TP
.B rrr_socket.get_filename()
Get the filename of the socket.
.TP
.B rrr_socket.send(object : rrr_vl_message|rrr_socket)
Send a
.B rrr_vl_message
or
.B rrr_setting
object on the socket.
.TP
.B rrr_socket.accept()
Accept a connection (for listening socket only).
.SH SEE ALSO
.Xr rrr(1),
.Xr rrr.conf(5)