.Dd 2021-08-26
.TH RRR_MSG 1
.SH NAME
Read Route Record is a dynamic module-based message handling program
for collecting, buffering, processing and storing messages and measurements.
.PP
.B rrr_msg
shows the contents of RRR messages stored as files.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rrr_msg {FILE}...
.Dl [-r|--read] (default mode)
.Dl [-i|--ignore-errors]
.Dl [-f|--force]
.Dl [-s|--selftest]
.Dl [-l|--loglevel-translation]
.Dl [-b|--banner]
.Dl [-e|--environment-file[=]ENVIRONMENT FILE]
.Dl [-d|--debuglevel[=]DEBUG FLAGS]
.Dl [-D|--debuglevel-on-exit[=]DEBUG FLAGS]
.Dl [-h|--help]
.Dl [-v|--version]

.SH DESCRIPTION
This program reads RRR messages stored as files and shows the contents.
The timestamp, topic and other metadata from the messages are shown.
Optionally, message data and array data can be printed out.

Multiple message types may be read, although only RRR data and array message are usually stored as files.

.Bl -dash
.It
RRR messages (data and array)
.It
RRR control messages (internal)
.It
RRR log messages (internal)
.It
RRR address messages (internal)
.El

The header and body checksums of messages will be validated when they are read. Messages which fail validation will not be parsed.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP FILE
The RRR file or files to show.
.IP -r|--read
Activate read mode, default behaviour.
.IP -i|--ignore-errors
Continue even if an error occurs while reading a file. The program will not indicate an error in the return value.
.IP -f|--force
Force read attempt for messages with unknown array version.
.IP -s|--selftest
Runs an internal test of message parsing. File arguments are ignored.
.IP -l|--loglevel-translation
Translate output loglevels to RFC5424 format. Internal loglevels will be translated so that error messages become ERROR
and other messages DEBUG (loglevels 3 and 7).
.IP -b|--banner
Print RRR banner before starting.
.IP -e|--environment-file
Specify an environment file to read in before the program starts. See
.Xr rrr(1)
for details.
.IP -d|--debuglevel[=]FLAGS
.IP -D|--debuglevel_on_exit[=]FLAGS
Enable debug messages.

The debuglevel is produced by adding one or more of the following numbers together:
.Bl -tag -width -indent
.It 0
Severe errors (always printed)
.It 2
Dumps any array data from an RRR array message.
.It 32
Dumps any data from an RRR data message.
.It 64
Prints debug information about sockets and file reading.
.El

Other debuglevels specified in
.Xr rrr(1)
can be used but or not likely to be useful.

The parameter
.B debuglevel_on_exit
has not effect.

.SH RETURN VALUE
.B rrr_msg
returns 0 on success or 1 if a message could not be read or if validation failed.

.SH DEBUG FLAGS
Refer to
.Xr rrr(1)
for possible debug flags. See also
.B RETURN VALUE
and
.B SECURITY NOTES.

.SH SEE ALSO
.Xr rrr(1)
