.Dd 2025-02-15
.TH RRR_LOGD 1
.SH NAME
Read Route Record is a dynamic module-based message handling program
for collecting, buffering, processing and storing messages and measurements.
.PP
.B rrr_logd,
the RRR log daemon, receives log messages on a socket from either
.B rrr_post
or the
.B rrr
main daemon. Multiple processes may connect to the log daemon socket,
and the log messages are printed to standard output.
.PP
The log daemon may help in situations where standard output from multiple processes gets interleaved. 
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rrr_logd [OPTIONS] [WRAPPER AND ARGS]
.Dl [-s|--socket[=]SOCKET]
.Dl [-f|--file-descriptor[=]FILE DESCRIPTOR]
.Dl [-p|--persist]
.Dl [-q|--quiet]
.Dl [-a|--add-newline]
.Dl [-m|--message-only]
.Dl [-j|--json]
.Dl [-u|--unbuffered]
.Dl [-l|--loglevel-translation]
.Dl [-e|--environment-file[=]ENVIRONMENT FILE]
.Dl [-d|--debuglevel[=]DEBUG FLAGS]
.Dl [-D|--debuglevel-on-exit[=]DEBUG FLAGS]
.Dl [-h|--help]
.Dl [-v|--version]

.SH DESCRIPTION
The log daemon may receive both native RRR log messages and RRR array messages with specific fields set.

If array messages are used, the following fields are expected to be present of which most are optional:

If a wrapper process is specified, each line will be written to this process, and output is read back.
This allows for modifying logs before printed out.

.Bl -tag -width -indent

.It log_level_translated
RFC 5424 loglevel, small integer. If not given, 7 is used.

.It log_flags
If given and set to 1, this indicates that the log message is in JSON format.

.It log_prefix
The log prefix. If not given, "rrr_logd" will be used.

.It log_message
The actual log message. This value is mandatory.

.It log_file
.It log_line
The file name and line from where the log message originates, string and integer.
If either is not given, values from the
.B rrr_logd
code will be used.

.El

.SH OPTIONS
.IP -s|--socket[=SOCKET]
The filename of the socket on which to listen for incoming connections from other RRR processes.

.IP -f|--file-descriptor[=FILE DESCRIPTOR]
If
.B rrr_logd
is started by for instance
.Xr execve(2)
after a fork, a numeric file handle may be given for a socket on which the parent process sends messages.

.IP -p|--persist
If not set, the process will terminate once the last user has disconnected.

.IP -q|--quiet
Don't print any messages received from other processes. Used for debugging.

.IP -n|--add-newline
Add a newline (ASCII decimal 10) to any message received not already ending with one.

.IP -m|--message-only
Print only the message text and not log level and prefix.

.IP -j|--json
If given, all data will be printed in JSON format.
The fields present in the JSON output correspond to the fields of array log messages (see above).

If the JSON flag is set in
.B log_flags
or in the flags of native RRR log messages, the JSON in those log messages will be merged with these fields.
If any field names collide, existing fields from the JSON will be overwritten silently.

If
.B --message-only
is set, ony the field
.B log_message
will be present in the JSON.

JSON data will be printed with one log object per line, with lines separated by newline, regardless of the
.B --add-newline
parameter.

.IP -u|--unbuffered
Make standard output unbuffered.

.IP -l|--loglevel-translation
Translate any RRR native log level in received messages to RFC 5424 format.
This will only affect messages coming from the main RRR daemon.
Messages from
.B rrr_post
must always have RFC 5424 format.

.IP -d|--debuglevel[=]FLAGS
Debuglevel to use. Will only affect log messages internal to
.B rrr_logd.

.IP -e|--environment-file
See
.Xr rrr(1)
for usage.

.SH SIGNALS
.IP SIGURS1
Terminal process nicely.
.IP SIGINT/CTRL+C
Terminal process nicely.
.IP SIGTERM
Terminal process nicely.
.IP SIGPIPE
Ignored (an error message is printed).
.PP

.SH RETURN VALUE
.B rrr_post
returns 0 on success and 1 on failure.

.SH DEBUG FLAGS
Refer to
.Xr rrr(1)
for possible debug flags.

.SH SEE ALSO
.Xr rrr(1),
.Xr rrr_post(1)
