.Dd 2022-05-05
.TH RRR_SUB 1
.SH NAME
Read Route Record is a dynamic module-based message handling program
for collecting, buffering, processing and storing messages and measurements.
.PP
.B rrr_sub
subscribes to topics on an MQTT broker and prints out messages received.
Both messages containing RRR messages and plain data are supported.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rrr_sub [TOPIC]...
.Dl [-B|--broker[=]BROKER] (defaults to localhost)
.Dl [-P|--port[=]PORT] (defaults to 1883)
.Dl [-l|--loglevel-translation]
.Dl [-b|--banner]
.Dl [-e|--environment-file[=]ENVIRONMENT FILE]
.Dl [-d|--debuglevel[=]DEBUG FLAGS]
.Dl [-D|--debuglevel-on-exit[=]DEBUG FLAGS]
.Dl [-h|--help]
.Dl [-v|--version]

.SH DESCRIPTION
This program reads plain or RRR messages from an MQTT broker.

The type of message is auto-detected. If it appers to be an RRR message, checksums will be validated.

If the connection to the MQTT broker is lost or cannot be established,
.B rrr_sub
will attempt to reconnect indefinately.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP [TOPIC]...
One or more topic filters to subscribe to may be specified. If none are given, no subriptions are made.
.IP -B|--broker[=]BROKER
Set the address of the broker to use. 'localhost' is used if left unset.
.IP -P|--port[=]PORT
Set the port number to use when connecting to the broker. Port 1883 is used if left unset.
.IP -l|--loglevel-translation
Translate output loglevels to RFC5424 format. Internal loglevels will be translated so that error messages become ERROR
and other messages DEBUG (loglevels 3 and 7).
.IP -b|--banner
Print RRR banner before starting.
.IP -e|--environment-file
Specify an environment file to read in before the program starts. See
.Xr rrr(1)
for details.
.IP -d|--debuglevel[=]FLAGS
.IP -D|--debuglevel_on_exit[=]FLAGS
Enable debug messages.

The debuglevel is produced by adding one or more of the following numbers together:
.Bl -tag -width -indent
.It 0
Severe errors (always printed)
.It 1
General information about communication with the MQTT broker.
.It 2
Dumps any array data from an RRR array message.
.It 4
Detailed information about communication with the MQTT broker.
.It 32
Dumps any data from an RRR data message.
.It 64
Prints debug information about sockets and file reading.
.El

Other debuglevels specified in
.Xr rrr(1)
can be used but might not be useful.

The parameter
.B debuglevel_on_exit
has not effect.

.SH RETURN VALUE
.B rrr_sub
returns 0 on success or 1 on errors.

.SH DEBUG FLAGS
Refer to
.Xr rrr(1)
for possible debug flags.

.SH SEE ALSO
.Xr rrr(1)
