.Dd 2021-03-10
.TH RRR_STATS 1
.SH NAME
Read Route Record is a dynamic module-based message handling program
for collecting, buffering, processing and storing messages and measurements.
.PP
.B rrr_stats
connects to RRR through a socket and displays information about the running modules.
Multiple RRR instances can be monitored simultaneously.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rrr_stats [RRR SOCKET (PREFIX)]
.Dl [-p|--exact-path]
.Dl [-E|--events]
.Dl [-J|--journal]
.Dl [-M|--messages]
.Dl [-e|--environment-file[=]ENVIRONMENT FILE]
.Dl [-d|--debuglevel[=]FLAGS]
.Dl [-D|--debuglevel-on-exit[=]FLAGS]
.Dl [-h|--help]
.Dl [-v|--version]

.SH DESCRIPTION
This program requires
.Xr rrr(1)
to be running and listening on a UNIX socket by starting it with the
.B -s
argument. The socket name is usually in the format
.B /var/run/rrr_stats.xxxxx,
where xxxxx is the PID of the running RRR process, and
.B rrr_stats
will look for a socket named this unless another name is specified at command line.
.PP
.SH OPTIONS
.IP -e|--exact-path
Use exact socket path, don't use prefix search.
.IP -E|--events
Print hooked events as they arrive. Requires that RRR is started with the
.B -E
argument, and if not, no messages will be printed.
May not be used together with journal or message printing.
.IP -J|--journal
Print journal (log) messages as they arrive.
Which messages are printed depends on the active debuglevel of RRR.
May not be used together with message or event printing.
.IP -M|--messages
Print hooked messages as they arrive. Requires that RRR is started with the
.B -M
argument, and if not, no messages will be printed.
If debuglevel 2 is active, any message array data will be dumped.
May not be used together with journal or event printing.
.IP -d|--debuglevel[=]FLAGS
Debuglevel to use.
.IP -D|--debuglevel-on-exit[=]FLAGS
Debuglevel to use when program exits.
.IP -e|--environment-file
See
.Xr rrr(1)
for usage.
.PP
.SH RETURN VALUE
.B rrr_stats
returns 0 on success and 1 on failure.

.SH DEBUG FLAGS
Refer to
.Xr rrr(1)
for possible debug flags.

.SH SEE ALSO
.Xr rrr(1),
.Xr rrr.conf(5)
