.Dd 2020-06-17
.TH RRR_PASSWD 1
.SH NAME
Read Route Record is a dynamic module-based message handling program
for collecting, buffering, processing and storing messages and measurements.
.PP
.B rrr_passwd
modifies RRR password files by setting permissions and user passwords.
The password files are used by 
.Xr rrr(1)
modules to authenticate users.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rrr_passwd {PASSWORD_FILE} {USERNAME}
.Dl [-c|--create-user]
.Dl [-r|--remove-user]
.Dl [-p|--permissions[=]permission1,permission2,...]
.Dl [-a|--append-permissions]
.Dl [-P|--password[=]PASSWORD]
.Dl [-s|--stdout]
.Dl [-l|--loglevel-translation]
.Dl [-d|--debuglevel[=]DEBUG FLAGS]
.Dl [-D|--debuglevel_on_exit[=]DEBUG FLAGS]
.Dl [-h|--help]
.Dl [-v|--version]

.SH DESCRIPTION
This program modifies the specified RRR password file according to given arguments.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP PASSWORD_FILE
The password file to modify. The file will be created if it does not exist. Required parameter.
.IP USERNAME
The username to work with. Invalid characters for usernames are ':' (colon) and ',' (comma). Required parameter.
.IP -c|--create-user
Create a new user in the password file. An error will be produces if the username already exists. If not given, it is
assumed that an existing user are to be modified.
.IP -r|--remove-user
Remove a user from the password file.
.IP -p|--permissions[=]permission1,permission2,...
A comma separated list of permissions to set for the username. RRR modules which support authentication will look these
values up when authenticating users. If left unspecified, original values are kept (if any). Invalid characters for
permissions are ':' (colon) and ',' (comma). Duplicate entries are removed.
May be set to an empty string, e.g. "", to clear all permissions. 
.IP -a|--append-permissions
If this option is given, the list in
.B -p
is appended to existing permissions (if any). If not given, values in
.B -p
will replace all existing values. Duplicate entries are removed.
.IP -P|--password[=]PASSWORD
Password to set for the username.
If not given, and if no other options are set, a password will be prompted for in the terminal.
May be set to an empty string, e.g. "", to remove set an empty password for a user hence disabling it. 
.IP -s|--stdout
Don't modify the original file but print the final result to standard output.
.IP -d|--debuglevel[=]FLAGS
Debuglevel to use.
.IP -D|--debuglevel_on_exit[=]FLAGS
Debuglevel to use when program exits.
.IP -l|--loglevel-translation
Translate output loglevels to RFC5424 format. Internal loglevels will be translated so that error messages become ERROR
and other messages DEBUG (loglevels 3 and 7).

.SH PASSWORD SECURITY
If RRR is compiled without OpenSSL support, passwords will be stored in
.B base64 encoded plain text.
Otherwise, passwords will be stored using PKCS5_PBKDF2_HMAC with SHA-256 and 20,000 rounds.

.SH RETURN VALUE
.B rrr_passwd
returns 0 on success and 1 on failure.

.SH DEBUG FLAGS
Refer to
.Xr rrr(1)
for possible debug flags.
.B rrr_passwd
does not produce any debug information at this time.

.SH SEE ALSO
.Xr rrr(1),
.Xr rrr.conf(5),
.Xr rrr_auth(1)
